[Docs/Tune] "getting data in and out of Tune" doc (#30717)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/tune/tutorials/tune_get_data_in_and_out.md

            -1
        ) + model["hyperparameter_b"] * 0.1 * data["A"].sum()
        trained_model = {"state": model, "epoch": epoch}
```

Our `training_function` function requires a pandas DataFrame, a model with some hyperparameters and the number of epochs to train the model for as inputs. The hyperparameters of the model impact the metric returned, and in each epoch (iteration of training), the `trained_model` state is changed.

We will run hyperparameter optimization using the [Tuner API](tune-run-ref).

```python
from ray.tune import Tuner
from ray import tune

tuner = Tuner(training_function, tune_config=tune.TuneConfig(num_samples=4))
```

## Getting data in

First order of business is to provide the inputs for the Trainable. We can broadly separate them into two categories - variables and constants.

Variables are the parameters we want to tune. They will be different for every [Trial](tune_60_seconds_trials). For example, those may be the learning rate and batch size for a neural network, number of trees and the maximum depth for a random forest, or the data partition if you are using Tune as an execution engine for batch training.

> Constants are the parameters that are the same for every Trial. Those can be the number of epochs, model hyperparameters we want to set but not tune, the dataset and so on. Often, the constants will be quite large (eg. the dataset or the model).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Constants are the parameters that are the same for every Trial. Those can be the number of epochs, model hyperparameters we want to set but not tune, the dataset and so on. Often, the constants will be quite large (e.g. the dataset or the model).
```

### Search space

```{note}
TL;DR - use the `param_space` argument to specify small, serializable constants and variables.
```

> The first way of passing inputs into Trainables is the [*search space*](tune-key-concepts-search-spaces) (it may also be called *parameter space* or *config*). In the Trainable itself, it maps to the `config` dict passed in as an argument to the function. You define the search space using the `param_space` argument of the `Tuner`. The search space is a dict and may be composed of [*distributions*](<tune-sample-docs>), which will sample a different value for each Trial, or out of constant values. The search space may be composed out of nested dictionaries, and those in turn can have distributions as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first way of passing inputs into Trainables is the [*search space*](tune-key-concepts-search-spaces) (it may also be called *parameter space* or *config*). In the Trainable itself, it maps to the `config` dict passed in as an argument to the function. You define the search space using the `param_space` argument of the `Tuner`. The search space is a dict and may be composed of [*distributions*](<tune-sample-docs>), which will sample a different value for each Trial, or of constant values. The search space may be composed of nested dictionaries, and those in turn can have distributions as well.
```

    # Simulate training & evaluation - we obtain back a "metric" and a "trained_model".
    for epoch in range(epochs):
        # Simulate doing something expensive.
        time.sleep(1)
        metric = (0.1 + model["hyperparameter_a"] * epoch / 100) ** (
            -1
        ) + model["hyperparameter_b"] * 0.1 * data["A"].sum()
        trained_model = {"state": model, "epoch": epoch}

tuner = Tuner(
    training_function,
    param_space={
        "hyperparameter_a": tune.uniform(0, 20),
        "hyperparameter_b": tune.uniform(-100, 100),
        "epochs": 10,
    },
)
```

Next step is to wrap the `training_function` using `tune.with_parameters` before passing it into the `Tuner`. Every keyword argument of the `tune.with_parameters` call will be mapped to the keyword arguments in the Trainable signature.

```python
data = pd.DataFrame({"A": [1, 2, 3], "B": [4, 5, 6]})

tuner = Tuner(
    tune.with_parameters(training_function, data=data),
    param_space={
        "hyperparameter_a": tune.uniform(0, 20),
        "hyperparameter_b": tune.uniform(-100, 100),
        "epochs": 10,
    },
    tune_config=tune.TuneConfig(num_samples=4),
)
```

### Loading data in Trainable

> You can also load data directly in Trainable from eg. cloud storage, shared file storage such as NFS, or from the local disk of the Trainable worker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also load data directly in Trainable from e.g. cloud storage, shared file storage such as NFS, or from the local disk of the Trainable worker.
```

      <td>1.034228</td>
      <td>True</td>
      <td>False</td>
      <td>NaN</td>
      <td>NaN</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>0b239_00002</td>
      <td>aa38dd786c714486a8d69fa5b372df48</td>
      <td>2022-11-30_17-40-28</td>
      <td>...</td>
      <td>ip-172-31-43-110</td>
      <td>172.31.43.110</td>
      <td>10.333781</td>
      <td>0</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>0.005286</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>8.129285</td>
      <td>28.846415</td>
      <td>/home/ubuntu/ray_results/training_function_202...</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>3</th>
      <td>-16.138780</td>
      <td>1.020072</td>
      <td>True</td>
      <td>False</td>
      <td>NaN</td>
      <td>NaN</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>0b239_00003</td>
      <td>5b401e15ab614332b631d552603a8d77</td>
      <td>2022-11-30_17-40-28</td>
      <td>...</td>
      <td>ip-172-31-43-110</td>
      <td>172.31.43.110</td>
      <td>10.242707</td>
      <td>0</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>0.003809</td>
      <td>10</td>
      <td>17.982020</td>
      <td>-27.867871</td>
      <td>/home/ubuntu/ray_results/training_function_202...</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
<p>4 rows × 23 columns</p>
</div>

> Checkpoints, metrics, and the log directory for each trial can be accessed through the `ResultGrid` output of a Tune experiment. For more information on how to interact with the returned `ResultGrid`, see {doc}`/tune/examples/tune_analyze_results`.

Reviewer 2: How do you access this after the job/cluster has been terminated? Actually this was the original user question behind this ticket.

We will run hyperparameter optimization using the [Tuner API](tune-run-ref).

```python
from ray.tune import Tuner
from ray import tune

tuner = Tuner(training_function, tune_config=tune.TuneConfig(num_samples=4))
```

## Getting data in

First order of business is to provide the inputs for the Trainable. We can broadly separate them into two categories - variables and constants.

Variables are the parameters we want to tune. They will be different for every [Trial](tune_60_seconds_trials). For example, those may be the learning rate and batch size for a neural network, number of trees and the maximum depth for a random forest, or the data partition if you are using Tune as an execution engine for batch training.

Constants are the parameters that are the same for every Trial. Those can be the number of epochs, model hyperparameters we want to set but not tune, the dataset and so on. Often, the constants will be quite large (eg. the dataset or the model).

### Search space

```{note}

> TL;DR - use the `param_space` argument to specify small, serializable parameters that you want to tune over.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
TL;DR - use the `param_space` argument to specify small, serializable constants and variables.
```

```{warning}
Objects put into the Ray object store must be serializable.
```

Note that the serialization (once) and deserialization (for each Trial) of large objects may incur a performance overhead.

In our example, we will pass the `data` DataFrame using `tune.with_parameters`. In order to do that, we need to modify our function signature to include `data` as an argument.

```python
def training_function(config, data):
    model = {
        "hyperparameter_a": config["hyperparameter_a"],
        "hyperparameter_b": config["hyperparameter_b"],
    }
    epochs = config["epochs"]

    # Simulate training & evaluation - we obtain back a "metric" and a "trained_model".
    for epoch in range(epochs):
        # Simulate doing something expensive.
        time.sleep(1)
        metric = (0.1 + model["hyperparameter_a"] * epoch / 100) ** (
            -1
        ) + model["hyperparameter_b"] * 0.1 * data["A"].sum()
        trained_model = {"state": model, "epoch": epoch}

> tuner = Tuner(

Reviewer 3: We should move this tuner with param space to the previous section to show how to specify `param_space`.

    training_function,
    param_space={
        "hyperparameter_a": tune.uniform(0, 20),
        "hyperparameter_b": tune.uniform(-100, 100),
        "epochs": 10,
    },
)
```

Next step is to wrap the `training_function` using `tune.with_parameters` before passing it into the `Tuner`. Every keyword argument of the `tune.with_parameters` call will be mapped to the keyword arguments in the Trainable signature.

```python
data = pd.DataFrame({"A": [1, 2, 3], "B": [4, 5, 6]})

tuner = Tuner(
    tune.with_parameters(training_function, data=data),
    param_space={
        "hyperparameter_a": tune.uniform(0, 20),
        "hyperparameter_b": tune.uniform(-100, 100),
        "epochs": 10,
    },
    tune_config=tune.TuneConfig(num_samples=4),
)
```

### Loading data in Trainable

> You can also load data directly in Trainable from eg. cloud storage, NFS or from disk.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also load data directly in Trainable from eg. cloud storage, shared file storage such as NFS, or from the local disk of the Trainable worker.
```

```{warning}
When loading from disk, ensure that all nodes in your cluster have access to the file you are trying to load.
```

A common use-case is to load the dataset from S3 or any other cloud storage with pandas, arrow or any other framework.

The working directory of the Trainable worker will be automatically changed to the corresponding Trial directory. For more details, see {ref}`tune-working-dir`.

> For brevity, we will not use this approach in our example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Our tuning run can now be run, though we will not yet obtain any meaningful outputs back.

```python
results = tuner.fit()
```

>     2022-11-30 17:39:53,677	INFO worker.py:1529 -- Started a local Ray instance. View the dashboard at [1m[32mhttp://127.0.0.1:8265 [39m[22m

Reviewer 3: Maybe remove the tuner outputs here as well.

## Getting data out

We can now run our tuning run using the `training_function` Trainable. The next step is to report *metrics* to Tune that can be used to guide the optimization. We will also want to *checkpoint* our trained models so that we can resume the training after an interruption, and to use them for prediction later.

The [`ray.air.session`](air-session-ref) API is used to get data out of the Trainable workers. `session.report` can be called multiple times in the Trainable function. Each call corresponds to one iteration (epoch, step, tree) of training.

### Reporting metrics

*Metrics* are values passed through the `metrics` argument in a `session.report` call. Metrics can be used by Tune [Search Algorithms](search-alg-ref) and [Schedulers](schedulers-ref) to direct the search. After the tuning run is complete, you can [analyze the results](/tune/examples/tune_analyze_results), which include the reported metrics.

```{warning}
Similarly to search space values, each value reported as a metric will be saved directly in the Trial metadata. This means that every value reported as a metric **must** be serializable and take up a small amount of memory.
```

```{note}

> Tune will automatically include some metrics, such as the training iteration, timestamp and more.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tune will automatically include some metrics, such as the training iteration, timestamp and more. See [here](tune-autofilled-metrics) the entire list.
```

Ray Tune can be configured to [automatically sync checkpoints to cloud storage](tune-checkpoint-syncing), {class}`keep only a certain number of checkpoints to save space <~ray.air.config.CheckpointConfig>` and more.

```{note}
The experiment state itself is checkpointed separately. See {ref}`tune-two-types-of-ckpt` for more details.
```

In our example, we want to be able to resume the training from the latest checkpoint, and to save the `trained_model` in a checkpoint every iteration. To accomplish this, we will use the `session` and `Checkpoint` APIs.

```python
from ray.air import Checkpoint

def training_function(config, data):
    model = {
        "hyperparameter_a": config["hyperparameter_a"],
        "hyperparameter_b": config["hyperparameter_b"],
    }
    epochs = config["epochs"]

    # Load the checkpoint, if there is any.
    loaded_checkpoint = session.get_checkpoint()

>     if loaded_checkpoint is not None:

Reviewer 3: Does this need `loaded_checkpoint.to_dict()`?

    else:
        last_epoch = 0

    # Simulate training & evaluation - we obtain back a "metric" and a "trained_model".
    for epoch in range(last_epoch, epochs):
        # Simulate doing something expensive.
        time.sleep(1)
        metric = (0.1 + model["hyperparameter_a"] * epoch / 100) ** (
            -1
        ) + model["hyperparameter_b"] * 0.1 * data["A"].sum()
        trained_model = {"state": model, "epoch": epoch}

        # Create the checkpoint.
        checkpoint = Checkpoint.from_dict({"model": trained_model})
        session.report(metrics={"metric": metric}, checkpoint=checkpoint)

tuner = Tuner(
    tune.with_parameters(training_function, data=data),
    param_space={
        "hyperparameter_a": tune.uniform(0, 20),
        "hyperparameter_b": tune.uniform(-100, 100),
        "epochs": 10,
    },
    tune_config=tune.TuneConfig(num_samples=4, metric="metric", mode="max"),
    run_config=RunConfig(
        callbacks=[MLflowLoggerCallback(experiment_name="example")]
    ),
)
```

With all of those changes implemented, we can now run our tuning and obtain meaningful metrics and artifacts.

```python
results = tuner.fit()
results.get_dataframe()
```

> <div class="tuneStatus">

Reviewer 3: Can we remove this tuner output and only show the dataframe? The table shows similar information and is not formatted that well in the markdown.

Checkpoints, metrics, and the log directory for each trial can be accessed through the `ResultGrid` output of a Tune experiment. For more information on how to interact with the returned `ResultGrid`, see {doc}`/tune/examples/tune_analyze_results`.

### How do I access results after I am finished?

After you have finished running the Python session, you can still access the results and checkpoints. By default, Tune will save the experiment results to the `~/ray_results` local directory. You can configure Tune to persist results in the cloud as well. See {ref}`tune-checkpoint-syncing` for more information on how to configure syncing.

> You can restore the Tune experiment by calling `Tuner.restore(path_or_cloud_uri)`, where `path_or_cloud_uri` points to a location either on the filesystem or cloud where the experiment was saved to. After the `Tuner` has been restored, you can access the results and checkpoints as outlined in the previous section.

Reviewer 2: Mention you can use `tuner.get_results()` to get the previous results without fitting.
